# Data Engineering 101: Introduction to Data Engineering

Data engineering is the practice of designing and building systems for collecting, storing, and analyzing data at scale. It is a broad field with applications in every industry worldwide. The companies using data engineering practice have the ability to collect a massive amount of data in each and every department and they need the right people with a knowledge in data engineering also known as data engineers and the specific technology to ensure that the data collected are usable and can add value to the company business by the time it reaches the data scientists and data analysts (Kalita, 2022). 

In addition, data engineers ease the lives of data scientists and data analysts by cleaning and structuring the data before shipping to BI tools for generating insights. The amount of data an engineer works with varies with the organization, particularly with respect to the organization size. The bigger the organization, the more complex the analytics architecture and the more data the engineer will be responsible for while cleaning and structuring complex data. Certain industries are more data-intensive such as healthcare, retail and the company delivering a financial services. Data engineers work in conjunction with data science teams while improving data transparency and enabling businesses to make more trustworthy business decisions (Chang, 2018 ).

## Data Engineers roles

The data engineering field is divided into several roles such as the generalists engineers,pipeline-centric engineers and database-centric engineers. The generalists engineers are generally focused on a typical work on small teams, end-to-end data collection and processing data. They may have more skills than most of data engineers but they have a less knowledge on systems architecture. The generalists data engineers works with small organization such as food delivery service and play a big role in generating dashboards to showcasing the number of deliveries and transactions made each day and be able to forecast the delivery volume and transactions within a month. The generalist data engineers should have also the ability to predict the future delivery volume and its associated transaction within a month, quarter and year (Lutkevich, 2021).

Pipeline-centric engineers are the data engineers who work with a midsize organizations and with more advanced data science projects across distributed systems. Midsize and large organizations require this role for the data engineers to query and centralize the data that are stored in different distributed environment to a single centralized warehouse. The data scientists and data analysts query the data stored in a single and centralized warehouse for generating insights on the available data. The pipeline-centric engineers look deep in available data to produce the predictive algorithms to predict the organization future business (Paruchuri, 2017). 
The Database-centric engineers are also the data engineers that are tasked to implement, maintain and populate an analytics databases. This role exists in a larger organizations where data is distributed across several databases. The data engineers work with pipelines to tune databases for efficient analysis and create table schemas while using extract, transform, load (ETL) methods.

## Extract, Transform and Load (ETL)

ETL is a process in which data is copied from several sources into a single destination system. A database-centric project incorporate a multistate and a national application which would be to design an analytics database. In addition to creation of the database, the data engineer would write the code to get data from where it is stored while collecting data in the main application database into the analytics database for the feasibility and cleaning up of the collected data while generating a structured database for both data analysts and data scientists. The new generated database helps in building dashboards and generate more sophisticated analysis for an organization to explore more on its data and predict its future based on the data (Taylor, 2022).

## Data engineer responsibilities
Data engineers often work as part of an analytics team alongside data scientists and data analytics. The data engineers provide data in a usable formats to the data scientists and data analytics who run queries and algorithms against the provided data for predictive analytics, machine learning and data mining applications. Data engineers also deliver aggregated data to business executives and analysts and other end users who want to analyze it and apply the results to the  improvement of  business operations while optimizing the organization income (Gupta, 2020).
Data engineers deal with both structured and unstructured data. Structured data is information that can be organized into a formatted repository like a database mostly in database tables and the Unstructured data are those data that doesn't conform to conventional data models such as text, images, audio and video files. Data engineers must understand different approaches to data architecture and applications to handle both data types. 

## Data Engineer Skills

Data engineers should be skilled in different programming languages such as C#, Java, Python, R, Ruby, Scala and SQL. The most used programming languages are Python, R and SQL where the data engineers use them to build ETL tools and REST-oriented APIs for creating and managing data integration jobs. These skills in programming also help in providing data analysts and business users with simplified access to prepared datasets while predicting organization future (INDIA, 2021 ). 

The data engineer also have to understand the Hadoop data lakes that offload the processing and storage which work on established enterprise data warehouses and support the big data analytics efforts for data engineers. The NoSQL databases and Apache Spark systems are also the tools needed by a data engineer while integrating different data components and data workflows. Data engineers should also have a knowledge of relational database systems such as MySQL and PostgreSQL, Lambda architecture which also supports unified data pipelines for batch and data streaming (RudderStack, 2021 ).

Business intelligence (BI) platforms and the ability to configure them are another important skill for data engineers as it is used to present the dashboards through the BI platforms to establish a  connections among data warehouses, data lakes and other data sources while generating insight. The data engineers must know how to work with the interactive dashboards for the BI platforms, machine learning for an intervention to the data scientists and machine learning engineer while building data warehouse (Mleczko, 2021). The data engineers should also know how to deploy machine learning algorithms and gain insights from them and lastly the Unix-based operating systems is important in the daily job of a data engineer such as Unix and Linux.

